# nanoFORTH
FORTH for Arduino nano(and UNO), implemented in C

##
You unboxed the Arduino UNO from Amazon with excitement, opened the awaiting Arduino IDE, carefully followed one of the numerous available online tutorials, found and compiled the Blink sketch in the included examples, hit the -> button and seconds later, the orange light started blinking! Success! You told yourself that "I think I can be pretty good at this"!
What comes next is weeks of ego-boosting of new component badges you collected. From the simple humidity-temperature (DHT), ultrasound (HC-SR04), to how-do-i-read-the-resistor-code LEDs, why-NEC infrared remote (HX1838), flimsy SG90 servos, and finally the damn gyro (MPU6050). OK, that was a pretty good run, you said. Kids were facinated, and even my typically unconcerning wife seemed to be impressed.
3 more months has gone by. Hundreds of compilation/uploading later, though your faithful UNO runs flawlessly blinking all the LEDs you gave him, somewhere in the back of your mind the flash memory's 100K write cycle thing arised. Maybe it's time to give the little brother, Nano, a try. Well, while we're at it, for $20, lets get a pack of five of these little guys might as well.
So, our journey started. A long time ago in the digital galaxy far, far away....a simple yet extensible programming language, FORTH, was often found on memory constrained space crafts or remote probes. With the ability to not only compile and run given code but also interact with the developer via a simple serial console. On Earth today, it's called a complete REPL programming environment, and possiblly can be controlled via wireless connection.
Jump back to our Nanos. The same old cycles of your C code in the Arduino IDE. Compile/upload, compile/upload,... until you're more or less ran out of ideas. Of the 32K flash equiped with Nano, you have never used over 10% and ocassically wonder how many lines of code it takes to fill it up. On Google, some said 20% with over 30K lines of code. However, they also said, to do anything more elaborate, the 2K RAM quickly becomes the limitation. You wonder in the space feeling lost and your mind went back to daily mondane.
One day, ESP shows up on you radar. It can do everything you've imagined thus far. Web serving, mesh-network, LoRa, even MySQL,... Programming-wise, there're C, microPython, even Ruby after some hard digging. Soon, the universe started to expand and what came into view is a Raspberry Pi. The final frontier suddenly became bondless. Your imagination was pushed far beyond the black holes and the vast void. Life became meaningful and sure got excited again. MotionEyes, OctaPi, robot buggy, and the plan to try some AI stuffs, ... Your heart were filled with joy and temptations. The limitation of CPU resource or storage is already a distant memory. 
One night, while you felt the new path is set and the final destination is in sight, you were driving home with distant cresting moon hanging, a thought flowed through your head. What about the Nanos?

