docs/n4_2_how.md, before:

\page page2 How

Start wiring up your breadboard and ready to have some fun? Well, since FORTH is such a different language, a better preparation is always recommended...

### An Interactive FORTH Tutorial
If your programming language exposure has been with C, Java, or even Python so far, FORTH is quite **different**. Quote Nick: <em>"It's no functional or object oriented, it doesn't have type-checking, and it basically has zero syntax"</em>. No syntax? So, anyway, before you dive right into the deep-end, here's a good online materials.
* Interactive tutorial for FORTH primer. It teaches you how FORTH fundamentally works such as the numbers, the stack, and the dictionary.
> <a href="https://skilldrick.github.io/easyforth/#introduction" target="_blank">Easy Forth Tutorial by Nick Morgan</a>

You can skip to next section and start getting your hands dirty right away. However, if you prefer gathering all the sticks before starting a fire or enjoy immersing yourself in the philosophical wonderland of FORTH, excellent online e-books are here free for you.
* Timeless classic for the history, paths, and thoughts behind FORTH language.
> <a href="http://home.iae.nl/users/mhx/sf.html" target="_blank">Starting Forth by Leo Brodie</a><br/>
> <a href="http://thinking-forth.sourceforge.net" target="_blank">Thinking Forth by Leo Brodie</a>

### Install nanoFORTH - to be simple and useful

* From GitHub directly
> <br/>
> \> git clone https://github.com/chochain/nanoFORTH onto your local Sketch directory
>
> \> copy examples/0_blink.ino from sub-directory, then rename it as nanoFORTH.ino<br/>
>
> \> open nanoFORTH.ino with Arduino IDE, and setup your Nano/Uno development board
>
> \> open Serial Monitor, set baud rate to 115200, and line ending to 'Both NL & CR'
>
> \> compile and upload, you should see the 'ok' prompt, and the built-in LED is blinking
>
> \> in Serial Monitor input bar atop, type WRD and hit the return key. See what nanoFORTH says.<br/><br/>

* From Arduino Library Manager
> <br/>
> \> from Arduino IDE->Tools->Manage Libraries, enter FORTH in search box
>
> \> find nanoFORTH in the short list, select the latest version, and click the Install button
>
> \> click the <a href="http://github.com/chochain/nanoFORTH" target="_blank">More Info</a> link taking you to nanoFORTH Github site
>
> \> copy examples/0_blink.ino to your own Sketch directory, then rename it accordingly
>
> \> open Serial Monitor, set baud rate to 115200, and line ending to 'Both NL & CR'
>
> \> compile and upload, you should see the 'ok' prompt, and the built-in LED should be blinking
>
> \> in Serial Monitor input bar atop, type WRD and hit then return key. See what nanoFORTH says.<br/><br/>

* Serial Monitor screenshot (sample) once nanoFORTH is uploaded successfully 
> <br/>
> |screen shot|
> |:--|
> |@image html nanoforth_init_screen.png|
<br/>

### Exercise

We have gone through a lot of 'paper work', time for some hands-on again. If needed, please review the previous page <a href="page1.html" target="_blank">here</a> for some instructions we've gone through earlier.

Now let's try some fancy stuffs to see what nanoFORTH has to offer.
* turn the tracing flag on, and try everything we did in the previous page
> 1 TRC ⏎<br/>
> **lit** **?Z**

* if too much info for you, then turn the tracing off
> 0 TRC ⏎<br/>

* get Arduino clock/millis, a double precision (i.e. 32-bit) value
> CLK ⏎<br/>
> ⇨ -26395_188_ok
>> \> the number about are for example only, your clock is different<br/>
>> \> we need two 16-bit cells on data stack to represent the double

* to benchmark something, let's defined a function **zz** that runs in empty loops and time it
> : **zz** 10000 0 FOR NXT ;⏎<br/>
> CLK DNG **zz** CLK D+ ⏎<br/>
> ⇨ 338_0_ok
>> \> Uur ten-thousand cycles are completed in 338ms, i.e. 34us/cycle, not bad!<br/>
>> \> DNG negate the first clock ticks<br/>
>> \> D+ add two clock counts (i.e. (-t0) + t1) to deduce the time difference

* find out how many bytes of memory has been used
> HRE ⏎<br/>
> ⇨ 76_ok

* dump the memory to see how all these words are encoded in the dictionary
> 0 HRE DMP ⏎

* at the end of the day, or in case of a power outage, let's save what's been done so far into EEPROM
> SAV ⏎

* when needed, we can clean up the sandbox i.e. reset the nanoFORTH system pointers for a fresh start
> BYE ⏎<br/>
> ⇨ nanoFORTH v1.0 ok
>> \> The data stack, return stack, and instruction pointers will all be set to 0

* after restart your Arduino, words can be restored from EEPROM where you saved earlier.
> LD ⏎<br/>
> 0 HRE DMP ⏎

Alright! That has pretty much concluded our rounds of exercise. You probably have guessed that the SAV/LD pair can provide the ability to withstand power failures or reboots for our future Nanos running in the field. Yes, indeed. Of course, we need to setup an initial startup address properly.

It's real-time, and multi-tasks. It can be reprogrammed on-the-fly or even over-the-air. It is interactive and extensible. Many many exciting stuffs can be added onto this simple system. Hopefully, this is a start of a fun journey far and beyond.

<br/>
<a href="page1.html">Review nanoFORTH command examples</a><br/>
<a href="page3.html">Learn nanoFORTH internal details</a>

Commit message:

~/docs update n4_* for autorun and comments

docs/n4_2_how.md, after:

\page page2 .2 How

Start wiring up your breadboard and ready to have some fun? Well, since FORTH is such a different language, a better preparation is always recommended...

### An Interactive FORTH Tutorial
If your programming language exposure has been with C, Java, or even Python so far, FORTH is quite **different**. Quote Nick: <em>"It's no functional or object oriented, it doesn't have type-checking, and it basically has zero syntax"</em>. No syntax? So, anyway, before you dive right into the deep-end, here's a good online materials.
* Interactive tutorial for FORTH primer. It teaches you how FORTH fundamentally works such as the numbers, the stack, and the dictionary.
> <a href="https://skilldrick.github.io/easyforth/#introduction" target="_blank">Easy Forth Tutorial by Nick Morgan</a>

You can skip to next section and start getting your hands dirty right away. However, if you prefer gathering all the sticks before starting a fire or enjoy immersing yourself in the philosophical wonderland of FORTH, excellent online e-books are here free for you.
* Timeless classic for the history, paths, and thoughts behind FORTH language.
> <a href="http://home.iae.nl/users/mhx/sf.html" target="_blank">Starting Forth by Leo Brodie</a><br/>
> <a href="http://thinking-forth.sourceforge.net" target="_blank">Thinking Forth by Leo Brodie</a>

### Install nanoFORTH - to be simple and useful

* From GitHub directly
> <br/>
> \> git clone https://github.com/chochain/nanoFORTH onto your local Sketch directory
>
> \> copy examples/0_blink.ino from sub-directory, then rename it as nanoFORTH.ino<br/>
>
> \> open nanoFORTH.ino with Arduino IDE, and setup your Nano/Uno development board
>
> \> open Serial Monitor, set baud rate to 115200, and line ending to 'Both NL & CR'
>
> \> compile and upload, you should see the 'ok' prompt, and the built-in LED is blinking
>
> \> in Serial Monitor input bar atop, type WRD and hit the return key. See what nanoFORTH says.<br/><br/>

* From Arduino Library Manager
> <br/>
> \> from Arduino IDE->Tools->Manage Libraries, enter FORTH in search box
>
> \> find nanoFORTH in the short list, select the latest version, and click the Install button
>
> \> click the <a href="http://github.com/chochain/nanoFORTH" target="_blank">More Info</a> link taking you to nanoFORTH Github site
>
> \> copy examples/0_blink.ino to your own Sketch directory, then rename it accordingly
>
> \> open Serial Monitor, set baud rate to 115200, and line ending to 'Both NL & CR'
>
> \> compile and upload, you should see the 'ok' prompt, and the built-in LED should be blinking
>
> \> in Serial Monitor input bar atop, type WRD and hit then return key. See what nanoFORTH says.<br/><br/>

* Serial Monitor screenshot (sample) once nanoFORTH is uploaded successfully 
> <br/>
> |screen shot|
> |:--|
> |@image html nanoforth_init_screen.png|
<br/>

### Exercise

We have gone through a lot of 'paper work', time for some hands-on again. If needed, please review the previous page <a href="page1.html" target="_blank">here</a> for some instructions we've gone through earlier.

Now let's try some fancy stuffs to see what nanoFORTH has to offer.
* turn the tracing flag on, and try everything we did in the previous page
> 1 TRC ⏎<br/>
> **lit** **?Z**

* if too much info for you, then turn the tracing off
> 0 TRC ⏎<br/>

* get Arduino clock/millis, a double precision (i.e. 32-bit) value
> CLK ⏎<br/>
> ⇨ -26395_188_ok
>> \> the number about are for example only, your clock is different<br/>
>> \> we need two 16-bit cells on data stack to represent the double

* to benchmark something, let's defined a function **zz** that runs in empty loops and time it
> : **zz** 10000 0 FOR NXT ;⏎<br/>
> CLK DNG **zz** CLK D+ ⏎<br/>
> ⇨ 338_0_ok
>> \> Uur ten-thousand cycles are completed in 338ms, i.e. 34us/cycle, not bad!<br/>
>> \> DNG negate the first clock ticks<br/>
>> \> D+ add two clock counts (i.e. (-t0) + t1) to deduce the time difference

* find out how many bytes of memory has been used
> HRE ⏎<br/>
> ⇨ 76_ok

* dump the memory to see how all these words are encoded in the dictionary
> 0 HRE DMP ⏎

* at the end of the day, or in case of a power outage, let's save what's been done so far into EEPROM
> SAV ⏎

* when needed, we can clean up the sandbox i.e. reset the nanoFORTH system pointers for a fresh start
> BYE ⏎<br/>
> ⇨ nanoFORTH v1.4 ok
>> \> The data stack, return stack, and instruction pointers will all be set to 0

* after restart your Arduino, words can be restored from EEPROM where you saved earlier.
> LD ⏎<br/>
> 0 HRE DMP ⏎

Alright! That has pretty much concluded our rounds of exercise. You probably have guessed that the SAV/LD pair can provide the ability to withstand power failures or reboots for our future Nanos running in the field. Well, we have another word for you. SEX it is. Short for Save and Execute. It saves the dictionary into EEPROM and set the autorun flag. When your Arduino reboot, the flag in EEPROM is checked. If it is indeed set, the last word saved will be executed.
* here's how you do it
> : **fun** ( -- ) CLK DNG **zz** CLK D+ ; ⏎<br/>
> SEX ⏎<br/>
> BYE ⏎<br/>
> ⇨ nanoFORTH v1.4 reset<br/>
> ⇨ 338_0_ok<br/>
>> \> When you entered BYE this time, nanoFORTH reboot and runs the last word you've saved. In our case, it is **fun** the benchmarker.
>> \> Note that the ( -- ) is a Forth-style comment that you can use. A \\ (back slash) can also be used to ignore comment to end of input line.

OK, makers often run service routine with their microcontrollers in the field. However, before you get creative and save your servicing word into EEPROM and run it in an endless loop, I have to confess that I actually do not know how to get out of a loop yet. Any recommendation is welcome.

So, nanoFORTH is real-time, and can multi-task. It can be reprogrammed on-the-fly or even over-the-air. It is interactive and extensible. Many many exciting stuffs can be added onto this simple system. Hopefully, this is a start of a fun journey far and beyond.

<br/>
<a href="page1.html">1. Why - Review nanoFORTH command examples</a><br/>
<a href="page3.html">3. What - Learn nanoFORTH internal details</a>
